so so the question is where did the
standard American diet come from the
standard American diet was nothing more
than the solution to a business problem
the standard American diet is what is
killing
[Music]
people hello everyone today I'm speaking
with physician longevity expert and now
author Dr Peter Adia we discuss his new
book outlive the science and art of
longevity and explore the immense
benefits that can be gained from
exercise in just 3 hours a week how
small imbalances in diet can cause major
problems such as diabetes and obesity
the difference between lifespan and
health span the soured reasoning behind
the American food pyramid and the
scientific side of alternative diets no
buzzwords
looking forward to the discussion
today Dr Adia in your book you talk
about lifespan in general but you also
concentrate on a
concept called Health span termed Health
span and you're concentrating more on
decades let's say of healthy life rather
than absolute length of Life do do you
want to expand on the concept of Health
span and why you distinguish between
that and Longevity per se yeah longevity
is really a function of lifespan and
health span so lifespan is the easier of
those two to understand because it's
binary you're either alive or you're
dead and I think when most people think
of longevity they think of the
elongation of lifespan understandably
but you know that's really only part of
it the other part uh the part that might
actually be more important to most
people when pressed on the issue is
Health span which is the quality of life
and the medical definition of Health
span is not a particularly helpful
definition in my view it's effectively
the period of time uh from which you
were free of disability and disease but
I don't really think that captures what
health span is to most people and so I
think Health span is is a broader
concept and it's not binary it is analog
uh but it really constitutes some
measure of cognitive health physical
health and emotional health and at least
two of those are intimately linked to
age which is to say they generally
decline with age um but if we focus I
think relentlessly on the pursuit of
those things we tend to get a better
quality of life overall and by the way I
think you get for free a lot of lifespan
benefits right so well uh it's very
important to get the definitions and the
measurements right because systems
optimize to maximize their score on what
they're measured by and I suppose living
to 140 wouldn't be so good if you were
scile for the last 70 years and
institutionalized for example and so it
sounds like when you talk about health
span you're intermingling
two uh what would you say two quality of
life issues one would be the expansion
of Youth rather than longevity per se
and then something associated with the
existential quality of life so maybe we
could start with
well does do does that seem to capture
do the interaction of those two things
seem to capture what you're talking
about with regard to health span yeah I
think so I think that the cognitive and
physical piece are the pieces that do
decline with age and we want to preserve
those as long as possible and we can be
very specific about what those things
are by the way right we could drill into
what is cognitive Health span what is
physical health span and then that other
one that is not so age dependent uh
might be at least as important uh and
probably frankly Falls uh much more into
your wheelhouse than mine professionally
at least and that is about the quality
of a person's life and the quality of
their relationships their sense of
purpose and things of that
nature the content I've created over the
past year represents some of my best to
date as I've undertaken additional
extensive exploration in today's most
challenging topics and experien a nice
increment in production quality courtesy
of dailywire plus we all want you to
benefit from the knowledge gained
throughout this adventurous Journey I'm
pleased to let you know that for a
limited time you're invited to access
all my content with a 7-Day free trial
at Daily wire plus this will provide you
with full access to my new In-Depth
series on marriage as well as guidance
for creating a Life vision and my series
exploring the book of Exodus you'll also
find there the complete library of all
my podcasts and lectures I have a
plethora of new content in development
that will be coming soon exclusively on
dailywire plus voices of reason and
resistance are few and far between these
Strange Days click on the link below if
you want to learn more and thank you for
watching and
[Music]
listening yeah so a long while back I
was looking at
interventions to improve people's lives
and I knew at that point that cognitive
decline was a major problem especially
in terms of well
productivity and uh and and general
competence and so it's pretty pronounced
linear downhill trend on the fluid
intelligence front from about the age of
25 forward and that can decline
precipitously in say late 70s early 80s
especially with the onset of
degenerative neurological diseases and I
was looking at the literature on
cognitive remediation this is back in
the times about 10 15 years ago when
there were a lot of online sites that
purported to run you through cognitive
exercises that could increase or
maintain your IQ there's never been any
evidence for that by the way it's a
pretty damn dismal literature but I what
I did find and I think this is extremely
solid is that if you want to maintain
your cognitive function that both
cardiovascular exercise and
weightlifting seem to do a pretty damn
good job and maybe that's because the
brain is such a oxygen demanding organ
uh and other obviously energ energ it's
energy demanding and resource demanding
in other ways and if you can keep
yourself car cardiovascularly fit
interestingly enough that's the best
Pathway to cognitive Health then I was
looking on the psychological side you
know and what I found was that there
were interventions that help people get
their story straight of course
Psychotherapy is one of those but there
are written interventions if people
write about their past about their past
traumas and if they write about their
future plans they reduce General
uncertainty that reduces their stress
and that seems to produce a relatively
pronounced physiological benefit and so
there's an interesting interplay there
that we can talk about more in terms of
the emotional and the physical it's
pretty funny that if you want to improve
your cognitive function or maintain it
you should exercise rather than think
and that if you want to improve your
physiology you should straighten out
your story and face your traumas rather
than say exercise so
um what do you
recommend in your book in outlive in
particular with regard to the expansion
of Health span what do you think and and
how do you practice this personally what
do you recommend to
people so I I think that exercise is
empirically the most valuable tool we
have for both the cognitive and physical
components so let's start with the
cognitive because I think here it was
less intuitive uh so about 10 years ago
when I really went down this Rabbit Hole
I had one of my research analysts uh
spend a lot of time going through the
literature so we created a framework
where we were going to look at every
single intervention and how it impacted
executive function processing speed
short-term memory long-term memory those
were the four metrics we cared about
because as you point out those are all
bits of uh intelligence that decline
with age so um and I we looked at
everything okay so we looked at every
molecule we looked at every possible
thing that you could think of and after
about nine months of this the thing that
stood out Above All Else Beyond any diet
beyond the importance of sleep and other
things that certainly mattered
controlling blood pressure lipids Etc
was exercise and I I I even though I was
a lifelong exerciser and love to
exercise I just couldn't believe it it
seemed so trite that exercise could have
such a profound difference on the state
of cognition not just in terms of its
performance as effectively a not Tropic
but also in its ability to delay if not
outright prevent uh dementia so once we
dug into the mechanisms I think it
became clear why exercise is so potent
and it's basically that it is acting on
so many different levels so as you
pointed out it's acting at a metabolic
level the brain is such an energy
demanding organ as you know and maybe
your listeners do you know it weighs
about 2% of your body weight and it's
responsible for 20 to 25% of your energy
consumption so therefore anything that
disrupts that is catastrophic so when
you look at the improvements in glucose
uh disposal insulin sensitivity and all
metabolic parameters exercise is the
most important tool we have there when
you look at the reduction of
inflammation vascular Health
improvements again exercise stand alone
when you look at the production of
neurotropic growth factors such as bdnf
again exercise is basically a drug for
neurons and so I think I eventually came
around after a year or so to realize
that again as simple as it sounds
exercise is such a potent tool and you
look at the brains of people who
exercise a lot and you can see far less
damage not just microvascular but in
terms of brain volume loss over time
so so let's talk about exercise from the
perspective of a behavioral psychologist
so one of the things you
learn as a behavioral psychologist is
that it's very difficult for people to
change their attitudes or their actions
and it's very difficult for people to
change their lives and so and we all
know this because we might tell
ourselves for example to exercise and we
might be well supplied with Arguments
for why that's a good idea but that
doesn't necessarily mean that we learn
how to incorporate an exercise routine
into our life and often the reason for
that there's many reasons I mean
exercise is difficult and that's one
reason but it's also often the case that
people don't form a strategy and break
the problem down into steps that are
simple enough to actually Implement so
they think things like well I'll go to
the gym two hours a day three times a
week and I'll start that next week and
truth of the matter is they don't have 6
hours to spend and they can't tell
themselves what to do anyways and so
what you do as a behavioral psychologist
is you look at the simplest possible
change that produces the maximal
possible benefit and so for example if
people are listening and they want to
begin to implement an exercise
routine like what about a daily walk of
10 minutes in the morning like where
would you start someone so it completely
depends on their Baseline but based on
your question Jordan I'm going to take
it as we're talking about someone who's
doing no exercise excise um yeah let's
start with them yeah so the good news is
first of all um and I accept the fact
that not everybody is swayed by data but
I at least want to put it out there so
if you're a person who's in the doing
zero exercise per week Camp the very
good news is the benefit you get from
going from zero to three hours a week is
a greater benefit than anyone gets along
the exercise curve right so taking
someone who at 5 hours and taking them
to 15 will produce less relative benefit
than going from 0 to three so in other
words I want that person to see some
real incentive for making this change
secondly I'll put some numbers to it
right so going from no exercise to three
hours a week approximately reduces your
cause of your all cause mortality that
is to say death by every cause by 50% at
any moment in time so if you're standing
there asking what's the probability I'm
going to die this year well we can sort
of actuarially figure that out you get
to cut that number in half by simply
going from Zer to three hours exercise a
week if you're a non- exerciser so again
there's going to be a subset of people
for whom that's a very powerful piece of
information they didn't know so then
what I would say was how how do you how
do you do that so I I agree with you
that you're much better off trying to do
30 minutes six times a week than three
hours once a day
uh or you know 2 hours you know in
whatever fashion so so what I would say
is the most effective way to do that is
probably about 90 minutes of low
intensity cardio and for a person who's
not particularly fit that's going to
amount to just brisk
walking rather than tell them what to do
I tell them how to feel when they're
doing it so what you want to feel is out
of breath enough that you can barely
carry out a conversation but you could
if you had to but not so out of breath
that you can't carry on a
conversation and not so easy that you
can speak easily so there's that sweet
spot in there physiologically we call
that zone too but I'm not going to bore
them with that nomenclature it's just
basically 90 minutes say three times 30
or two times 45 a week where you're just
out of breath enough that you don't want
to talk but you could if you had to
that's part one right so you you push
push yourself past your slightly past
your simple level of comfort that's
right and so let let me push on you a
bit with regards to three hours a week
um again from the perspective of taking
someone from zero to to
somewhere um what are the benefits let's
say you talked about the benefits of
walking something approximating 20 to 25
minutes a day that can be dispersed out
in various ways um you also mentioned
like 245 minute sessions or 330 minute
sessions if someone someone what would
happen if someone goes from zero to like
10 minutes a day or an hour a week where
do that benefits of that three hours
yeah it's a great that's a great
question I don't think we have the
Fidelity of the data at that level
because you generally don't push enough
of a conditioning benefit but I think
what you're getting at and we do this as
well is you want to separate between the
behavior change and the physiologic
change and for some people and James
Clear has written a lot about this but I
think a lot of people have come to the
same conclusion with any Behavior
change if it's a person who's never done
anything you're right the answer might
be for every day when you wake up in the
morning rather than your normal routine
of jumping in front of the computer I
want you to go and walk around the block
once it'll take four minutes but and so
I don't want to represent you're going
to get a physiologic benefit from that
you probably won't but what you will get
is you're going to start to reset a
behavior which is aha the first thing I
do in the morning now is this other
thing and we'll slowly increase that and
at some point you will get a physiologic
benefit but what we're doing is planting
the seed of how to change the
behavior yeah well you can always expand
that over a year I mean one of the
things another thing I learned as a
behavioral therapist this seems obvious
but it's not obvious enough so that
people think about it or put it into
practice is that your life is made up of
the very small number of things that you
repeat every day and these are often
things that people consider trivial so
for example lots of people sit down to
have dinner with their family every
evening and they don't consider that
special but because you do it every damn
day for an hour or an hour and a half
it's like 8% of your life so you only
have to get 15 of those things in order
and you have your whole life in order
same thing applies to a daily habit and
so if you started say walking for 10
minutes a day
well that's 70 minutes a week and that's
4 hours a month or 50 hours or One Work
Week a year and that's a substantive
change that's about 2% of your life your
awaking life something like that or at
least 2% of your awake working life and
so these it's useful for everyone
listening to understand that small
changes that you maintain can be of
radical importance and once you're
walking for 10 minutes a day it's a hell
of a lot easier to go to say 12 minutes
than it it is to go from zero to walking
at all so yeah so okay okay so let so
what do you think what what what did you
conclude as a consequence of going
through the literature with regards to
say uh weightlifting rather than
cardiovascular
exercise so in biology we look to
integral functions to give us a sense of
how valuable an input is and you don't
get many of them okay so most people are
probably familiar with something called
a hemoglobin A1c um it's a blood test
you get at the doctor and if it's high
enough it tells you if you have type 2
diabetes so if the hemoglobin A1c is
beyond
6.5% that tells you that over the past 3
months your average blood glucose has
been 140 milligram per deciliter which
is the cut off for type 2 diabetes so in
that sense hemoglobin A1c is an integral
of your behavior over the past three
months with respect to glucose we don't
have a lot of those but we have two
really amazing ones with respect to
exercise one of them is around strength
and muscle mass and one of them is
around Peak cardiorespiratory
Fitness with respect to so so I'll just
get to the punch line the punch line is
there is no metric that is more highly
associated with living a long life just
this is purely based on L length of life
there's no metric anywhere in the
medical literature that's more highly
correlated with this than having a high
V2 Max V2 Max is a measure of your Peak
cardiorespiratory Fitness but the second
most highly correlated metric of length
of life is a composite metric of
strength and muscle mass so in other
words the and and why why people always
ask me why is it so important I think
it's important because those things are
remarkable integral functions
V2 Max isn't just you want to Define do
you want to Define integral oh yeah
you're to good yeah so so they basically
tell you they add up the work that has
been done to that point so you don't
just have a V2 Max because you woke up
one day and decided to do something
positive you have a high VO2 max because
you've been training very hard for a
long period of time in many cases for
years similarly a person doesn't just
wake up and have a lot of muscle mass or
have a lot of great strength those
things are the product of a lot of work
and I think that's why they are so
potent in fact they are far more potent
as predictors of a long life than all of
the negative things you can imagine are
predictors of a short life so when you
look at things like smoking type 2
diabetes hypertension even the presence
of cancer has a lesser impact on the
shortness of your life than those other
variables have on the length of your
life yeah I've read that grip strength
for example is a good marker of
propensity for longevity well in
everyone but particularly in elderly
people and it isn't as you pointed out
because grip strength per se is
particularly important but because grip
strength happens to be a good marker for
overall what would you say
psychophysiological Integrity 100% 100%
yeah it's it's grip strength is one of
the most potent so put it this way the
if you compare the top Des a to the
bottom desis in grip strength it's a 70%
difference in incidence and death from
dementia all cause dementia not just
Alzheimer's every form of dementia when
I was in my mid
20s when I was 21 22 I weighed about 130
lb 135 lb I was 6'1 and so very very
thin and I spent about 3 years 4 years
intensely weightlifting and packed on
about 35 lbs of muscle I to eat like a
Mad Dog for about 3 years to do that but
one of the things I noticed that was
really cool was that I also got to be a
lot more coordinated I was using free
weights you know because free weights
help exercise all the little muscles and
tendons and but I also it also seemed to
me to be unbelievably useful for
facilitating likely for facilitating
nerve melanization and I thought then
think now that that was probably a good
marker that increase in coordination was
probably a good marker for improvement
neurological function and so as as as as
you age um it doesn't get a lot of
attention but sarcopenia which is the
loss of muscle mass the wasting away
that occurs with aging uh and again this
begins rather subtly um we we lose you
know what are called type two muscle
fibers first that's the Hallmark of
Aging so the the type of muscle fiber
that's responsible for explosive power
is the first one that begins to atrophy
when we age age uh even at my age I'm 50
I'm already experiencing that to a great
extent I don't have a fraction of the
explosive power I had at
25 um once you lose explosive strength
you start to lose overall strength and
once you lose that you're going to start
to lose muscle size is the very last
thing so by the time a person is 75 the
decline in muscle size which is already
preceding strength uh is significant now
we can do a lot to prevent this and I
think that that's what's being captured
by these statistics the people who are
able to delay that loss of strength and
muscle mass are the ones that are going
to live the longest on
average yeah so on the weightlifting
front we talked a little bit about you
know what you could do simply to start
working out on the cardiovascular front
and brisk walking is the simplest and
most straightforwardly
implementable strategy on that front I
would add one thing to that Jordan um
which is once a person reaches a certain
level of Fitness the brisk walk may not
be sufficient enough to produce enough
cardiovascular stress depends where you
live but if you live in an area where
you've got a lot of Hills that might not
be the case but for most people you know
there's a there's a limit in human gate
to how fast you can walk and for most
people it's about 3.5 to maybe up to 4
miles hour and again at a certain point
that's not going to be fast enough so
what we can do for that that individual
rather than have them transition to
running I like to put weight on their
back called rucking so you carry a
military type of backpack with plates of
weight in the back and now you without
putting additional stress on the knees
put additional stress on the
cardiorespiratory system so I just throw
that out there as additional ways to to
get this
done yeah well okay okay um as I said in
my 20s I worked out with free weights
and um I have an adjust set of
adjustable free weights now but what
what I found very straightforward and
actually implementable is to
use about I use about 20 25 pound
weights depending on how often I'm doing
it and run through uh I run through a
set of exercises through my whole body
you know starting with my calves and
moving upward and I can do a whole
workout routine about two sets of 15
exercises in about 20 minutes and so for
everyone listening it's also very simple
to use to start weightlifting because
all you need is a couple of dumbbells
size is going to depend on you know your
size and your strength but you can do an
awful lot with with two dumbbells you
can exercise your body in all sorts of
ways so that combined with walking and
well and you added another twist to that
that's not a bad
initiation anything add on the
weightlifting front yeah I think the
other thing that I would say and I think
about this stuff all the time so I I
have a very elaborate gym I do you know
every sort of exercise you can imagine
but sometimes I like thinking and
debating with people like what's the
single most important exercise you could
do if you could only do one and for the
lower body for the lower body I think
step UPS would be so if you had just two
dumbbells and a box you can do anything
right because you're going to do forward
Step Up backward step up side step up
you can go heavy you can go light you
focus on the concentric phase which is
the the phase of getting up concentric
is the phase of a muscle when it's
getting shorter but then you really get
to focus on how slowly you can step down
so my typical I'm doing box step ups at
least twice a week um I do a count of
one up three down so taking three full
seconds on that one leg to descend and
that's training what we think of as the
breakes so when we age this is a
particular form of strength that
deteriorates which is Ecentric strength
the strength that a muscle exhibits
while it is getting longer this is why
so many old people fall and the
mortality of a fall when you are above
the age of 65 is staggering so depending
on the series you look at 15 to 30% of
people over the age of 65 who fall and
break a hip will be dead within a year
of that fall of those who survive 50% of
them will experience a reduction in
class of Mobility so meaning people who
walked normally will walk with a cane
people who walked with a cane will walk
with a walker people who walked with a
walker will be a wheelchair bound this
is a profound change in quality of life
and a lot of it has to do with a loss of
this type of strength if you think about
it people are much more likely to hurt
themselves stepping off a curb when they
get old than stepping onto a curb it's
this it's these loss of breaks so uh
yeah a set of dumbbells which you can
carry around because that's really a
very important piece of upper body
strength is being able to carry
something that's where that grip
strength is coming from and being able
to do step UPS step Downs squats all
sorts of things uh yeah you don't you
don't want to let perfect be the enemy
of good when it comes to initiating this
type of
thing how how how high does the box work
can you use steps stairs like or do you
I think a box is superior um what you
want to be able to do is work up to a
height such that when the foot is on the
box the front leg is on the box the
thigh is parallel to the ground so for
most people that that's 16 in maybe 18
in a very tall person might be 20 in I
recommend people start at a 12 in Step
um until they you know sort of and and
you you start with your body weight
let's be clear I mean for many people
just doing a proper step up and step
down with body weight at 12 in is right
and actually in the book I it was
becoming so difficult to write about
this in detail that I did there's a
whole section where I write about how to
do this but in the end we created did a
a thing on our website where I just have
a bunch of videos where I illustrate
these things so in the book it directs
people to where to go to just see I
think eight or nine videos of the most
important exercises that I think people
should be able to do well we should put
that in the video description so we'll
have to remember to do that yeah all
right let's let's uh segue if you don't
mind to nutrition and diet and we can
talk about obesity diabetes and
inflammation on that front let I I was
interested in your comments on Diabetes
so my understanding and this is
entangled with the problem of
obesity my understanding is that when
Physicians test for blood sugar they age
adjust the
norms and that strikes me as let's say
peculiar because it
seems self-evident that if you have
normal levels of blood sugar at 4 but
that would make you diabetic or
pre-diabetic at 20 then you're actually
diabetic or pre-diabetic and what that
implies is that the rate of diabetes
which is already ridiculously and
preposterously devastatingly high is
actually much higher than we think so
correct me if I'm wrong or elaborate on
that if you would if you think I'm on to
something there so we don't do that I
can't speak to what any other physician
does but in our practice uh we hold
everybody to the same standard I think
we will acknowledge on one metric
because we use a
standardized dose of glucose when we do
what's called an oral glucose tolerance
test we will give women a little bit
more latitude because they don't have as
much muscle mass so there's a particular
test that we do where we give people 75
grams of glucose and we time at 30 60 90
and 120 Minutes what their glucose and
insulin level is and in that window of
time what you are testing is how
efficiently do their muscles take up
glucose that's called glucose disposal
so you're measuring insulin sensitivity
in glucose
disposal and in in that window of time
that's the only place you can put the
excess glucose and um because women have
less muscle than men we will tolerate a
slightly higher glucose response but we
want the same insulin response so that's
it's and it's a very subtle difference
um but no we we don't age adjust for
anybody we we sort of we want a
60-year-old to be as effective at this
as a
30-year-old whether you're feeling
stressed anxious or simply seeking a
moment of peace and Tranquility the
Hallow app has something for you H
offers an incredible range of guided
meditations and prayers that are
designed to help you deepen your
spirituality and strengthen your
connection to God with hallow you can
explore different themes and types of
prayer and meditation such as gratitude
forgiveness and Cent entering prayer you
can also choose from different lengths
of meditation to fit your schedule
whether you have a few minutes or an
hour with this user-friendly interface
in hundreds of guided meditations the
Hallow app has quickly become a go-to
resource for people seeking spiritual
growth and healing download the app for
free at hall.com Jordan you can set
prayer reminders and track your progress
along the way hallow is truly
transformative and will help you connect
with your faith on a deeper level so
what are you waiting for download the
hall app today at hall.com Jordan that's
hall.com
Jordan once again it's hall.com Jordan
for an exclusive 3-month free trial of
all 6,000 plus prayers and
meditations so can you outline for
people what happens during normal
Western aging let's say on the insulin
and glucose metabolism front and and
what that implies for age related
degenerative diseases
it's a very interesting thing and we're
not entirely clear why but there is an
unmistakable decline in insulin
sensitivity as a person
ages now it doesn't mean that you're
destined to have insulin resistance or
fatty liver disease or type 2 diabetes
when you age but what it generally means
is on average a person needs to be more
diligent as they age and I've Heard lots
of theories offered for this and my
guess is they all play a role role
there's clearly a reduction in
testosterone as we age testosterone is a
very Pro metabolic Health hormone right
so testosterone promotes lipolysis of
fat by muscle it's it promotes insulin
sensitivity in fact there was a a
clinical trial about a year and a half
ago that looked at PE men without type 2
diabetes but who were
pre-diabetic uh on and off testosterone
replacement therapy and you showed a
significant reduction in the progression
to type 2 diabetes in men on
testosterone so clearly the decline of
testosterone is playing a role in both
men and women by the way um we also see
less expression uh or or less uh
activity of an enzyme called lipoprotein
lipase LPL where it shifts more of its
uh activity from muscle to Fat this is
again an enzyme that is responsible for
the breakdown of
fat um there also other things as you
pointed out such as inflammation that
increases with aging
um we also tend to be less active as we
age and the one of the most important
things to preserve insulin sensitivity
is activity so there's a really famous
researcher at Yale named Jerry Schulman
who's one of the world's authorities on
the ideology of insulin resistance and
when he does clinical trials when he
does experiments on human subjects at
Yale
and he wants to study insulin resistance
the one criteria he must have is that
the subjects can't be physically
active so in other words for him to
figure out what insulin resistance looks
like even in a 20-year-old he has to
ensure that they are not exercising at
all so it's some combination of these
things and probably some other things
that are explaining why all of us have
to work harder as we age to avoid this
phenotype
so maybe you could Define insulin
resistance describe its relationship to
elevated blood sugar or to blood sugar
in general and then discuss the
relationship between the elevated blood
sugar insulin resistance and and aging
as
such so think of the muscle uh maybe as
a balloon and the balloon is the only
place where you can put air in this
analogy air is the
glucose so there are some balloons that
are very easy to blow up and you you
know you can put the glucose into the
muscle cell you can put the air into the
balloon quite easily you don't have to
blow very hard but imagine a balloon
that's very very difficult to put air
into and at some point you can get air
into it but you have to blow much harder
so the how hard you have to blow is is
the amount of insulin you need to put
the glucose into the muscle at some
point you will not be able to do that
you can't blow hard enough so again just
thinking about this in terms of
physiology glucose um is a molecule that
needs to be regulated very carefully in
our in our bodies too much and too
little is catastrophic and so the body
does a great job of trying to take
excess glucose out of the circulation
and put it into muscle cells by the way
just to put this in context Jordan a
healthy person has about one teaspoon of
glucose floating around all of their
circulation at any moment in time a
person with Frank teaspoon one teaspoon
a person with Frank diabetes has two
teaspoons that's the difference between
healthy and nearly dying right it's
profound how many teaspoons of sugar are
in a bottle of coke it's 30 I think or
35 uh about eight about eight teaspoons
in a small I was thinking of a big maybe
I was thinking in a big two l in a big
two L it would probably be about that
yeah yeah right so so our body is
amazing at doing this but it's a very
delicate dance between how much insulin
do you need to make that happen and the
the the canary in the coal mine of
insulin resistance is after a person is
challenged with glucose even if their
glucose levels normalize they needed
supranormal levels of insulin to do it
that's the initial blowing too hard on
the
balloon so when you develop insulin
resistance and that progresses to
diabetes you literally can't produce
enough insulin to get sugar into the
muscles that's correct eventually you
cannot make enough insulin and this is
Complicated by another factor which ties
into this Cascade of metabolic disease
which
is eventually fat starts spilling out
from the cells that we are meant to use
to or excess energy which are our actual
subcutaneous fat cells and that fat
starts spilling into other areas where
we're not supposed to have it into the
muscle which is what's causing the
actual mechanism of insulin resistance
it's the fat in the muscle that is
preventing the insulin signal from being
heard effectively by the muscle cell it
also expands into the liver that's what
that's what's called fatty liver disease
or non-alcoholic fatty liver disease the
fat starts to be deposited in the paint
pancreas where insulin is made and that
creates an inflammatory environment to
the insulin producing cells so now you
have the double whammy you need more
insulin but you can make less of it
because of the inflammation and this
thing very quickly spirals out of
control and the end state is type two
diabetes so now you have two teaspoons
of sugar in your blood instead of one
teaspoon and so what are the
consequences of that excess sugar load
which in absolute uh amount seems very
trivial right I mean one teaspoon in all
of your blood seems like almost nothing
and two doesn't seem like much either
but the difference is at two teaspoons
the difference is starting to tip you
towards toward towards what sort of so
you have two problems going on now you
have too much glucose and too much
insulin because remember when you have
that high level of glucose you're going
to be treated with drugs that aim to
increase insulin and that can sometimes
be insulin itself or it could be drugs
that produce more
insulin so let's start with the glucose
side of the equation the easiest way I
think to think about this is too much
glucose is bad for small blood vessels
too much insulin is bad for large blood
vessels so what are the small blood
vessels the very first place this shows
up is looking right into the eye so I've
always believed that a good
opthalmologist will spot metabolic dis
disease before any doctor will because
when they can look into the retinal
artery and see the earliest indication
of microvascular occlusion and
inflammation that is tied directly to
What's called the glycosilation so
glucose sticking to proteins including
hemoglobin in the blood that's basically
creating
microscopic um what we call esea or lack
of blood flow to the most distal
profused organs so other small vessels
that are absolutely ravaged by glucose
or the kidneys so diabetes along with
hypertension would be the most common
driver of endstage kidney disease you
also see it in the coronary arteries and
believe it or not it's probably one of
the most important physiologic drivers
of erectile dysfunction again very small
blood vessels in the penis and therefore
when these things succumb to um this
type of endstage glycosilation you're
going to see damage all around
conversely on the insulin side elevated
levels of insulin chronically it's a
progrowth factor so it's very likely the
explanation for why obesity is the
second uh leading environmental uh
contributor to cancer after smoking and
it also damages large and medium-sized
blood vessels like the aorta the cored
arteries Etc so this Cascade of again it
doesn't sound like much of a difference
as you said um it's a it's a chronic
issue that over enough time leads to the
destruction of most
tissues so can you lay out the
relationship now between insulin
resistance excess blood sugar and the
propagation of a fat
tissue now the fat is being used to
store energy but how does that actually
occur and how is that related to excess
sugar yeah so so in many ways uh we were
doing really well as a species until
till you know 100 years ago right in
that you know what allowed us to have
this remarkable escape from all other
species Visa natural selection was this
ability to store energy and fuel our
brains so as we talked about earlier
like the brain is such an energy
demanding organ that we couldn't have
survived if
we didn't have a way to keep energy
portable with us uh we you know how
would we survive a day with no food if
we didn't have a way to store energy CU
certainly more than one day you have to
use fat stores to get by you can't just
rely on glucose
stores so we have this very efficient
way to do it we have a very safe uh
Depot of subcutaneous fat where we can
put fat in it which is excess energy and
that's primarily fatty acids and also
excess glucose can be stored in this
form and we can acquire it as we need it
right so you know when energy stores are
low you go and you you get that or when
energy itself is low you go and acquire
this the problem comes when you exceed
the capacity of that so the way I
describe it in the book is everybody and
this is largely determined genetically
everybody has a bathtub some people have
a really big bathtub some people have a
really little bathtub the bathtub is the
total capacity of your uh your fat your
your fat cells to store fat
so water goes into the fat cell that's
the food you're eating there's a little
drain at the bottom which is all the
energy you're expending that's coming
out and therefore the energy in less the
energy out determines the balance of
water in the tub if you're getting
fatter the water is rising in the
bathtub at some point the water gets to
the lip of the tub you have now exceeded
your capacity for safe storage of fat or
in this case safe storage of water what
happens next is the water spills over
now it's gone from being totally
physiologically normal to total chaos
just as if water spilled over your
bathtub it would be total chaos right it
would ruin your house and the question
is where does that fat go once it spills
over and it's where it goes that causes
all of the problems we're talking about
when it goes into the muscle it impairs
the muscle's ability to sense insulin
and create the gluc ose transporter to
bring in glucose that's the sinanan of
insulin resistance when it goes into the
liver it creates inflammation which can
ultimately lead to curosis and liver
failure when it goes into the pancreas
it secretes cyto kindes that impair the
beta cells which produce insulin which
exacerbates the insulin resistance
problem when it surrounds your organs as
what we call visceral fat it releases
inflammatory cyto kindes that lead to
cardiovascular disease
disproportionately so again all of these
things are happening not because we're
getting fatter in the right place IE
water in the bathtub but because we're
getting fatter in the wrong place and
this is another example of which it
doesn't take a lot of fat to spill over
in if a person
has 20 kilograms of fat in their fat
cells it causes no issue it's the two
kilos that have spilled out into all
those other or orans that are driving
all the
damage yeah and I read too this is
another example of the dangers and
sometimes benefits of the things that
you repeat every day I read at some
point a while back that the Obesity
epidemic such as it is could be regarded
as being caused by the additional
consumption of one soft drink a day
non-diet soft drink obviously because of
course you're doing there's a lot of
sugar 8 T spoons which is four times as
much as you have in your blood if you're
diabetic but you're doing it every day
now and so that is hard on the systems
that use insulin to process sugar but it
also puts this Demand on your body to to
deal with the excess glucose how is that
glucose converted to or stored in fat
what's that mechanism so it's called the
technical name is is is uh denovo
lipogenesis lipogenesis making fat
denovo from scratch
so the liver can turn the liver is a
amazing organ by the way it's just if
we're going to give a shout out to any
organ in the body it might have to be
the liver it's just an unsung hero it
doesn't get the attention it deserves to
put just to go back to one other thing
this whole teaspoon of glucose in your
bloodstream if that number gets to half
a teaspoon you'll die your brain won't
have enough glucose but yet you're
turning through that at a rate of a
teaspoon every couple of minutes what's
responsible for titration the liver
never stops right so um one of the other
things that the liver does miraculously
is it has the ability to turn fat into
glucose it has pardon me it has the
ability to turn glucose into fat and it
has the ability to turn protein into
glucose so it can also change the
orientation of molecules and so the
process of turning glucose into fat is
basically an exercise in Breaking
glucose which is a six carbon molecule
down into two carbon Chun
and then joining them in a long fatty
acid chain we would much rather store
energy in fat it's the most efficient uh
chemical molecule in which to store
energy all the energy of course uh in
our body is in the form of chemical
energy stored in the bonds carbon to
carbon and carbon to hydrogen and a fat
is the most efficient vehicle to do that
so we would much rather actually store
energy as fat than in glucose and we
don't store that much as
glucose okay so let me step sideways
here for a moment I'd like to talk about
the food pyramid with you and so I'm
going to lay a little bit out about my
understanding of the food pyramid and
how it came about and then we could talk
about the standard Western diet and its
relationship to insulin resistance and
obesity so my understanding is that the
food pyramid was actually produced by
not by scientists or by MDS although
there were some MDS who were Consulting
who were mostly ignored but by the
Department of
Agriculture and it was a marketing
scheme essentially and that the
consequence of the marketing scheme was
that people were enticed and convinced
to rely primarily on carbohydrates for
their nutritional uh necessities and
perhaps carbohydrates at far too excess
a level now carbohydrates are transmuted
into glucose during metabolism and we
eat way more carbohydrates than we need
to produce the amount of glucose that we
need now people have been getting fatter
in a catastrophic way for about four or
five decades and that's really in no
small part since the introduction of the
food pyramid now I do understand that
part of the reason the Department of
Agriculture did this was because carb
hydrates and this was particularly true
of corn syrup do provide a very
inexpensive source of calories and if
you're dirt poor and you don't have
enough to eat I mean just getting enough
calories period is of vital importance
not everybody can afford steak for
example or or or or more expensive foods
of that type but virtually everyone poor
or not in the West can afford basic
carbohydrates but now we're in a sit but
having said that I also have read and I
I think it's valid that there was
evidence that this heavy carbohydrate
loaded diet that was being prescribed
was going to increase obesity and
diabetes which is done in at a level
that makes the pandemic epidemic look
like absolutely nothing and and this is
still being pushed forward by people who
are hypothetically on the nutritional
front so two questions what's your
understanding of the derivation of the
food pyramid and what do you think about
its recommendations for the typical diet
so I think before getting to that
there's a broader point I want to touch
on that you just sort of alluded to
which is what is the system optimizing
for so uh in the book I talk about the
standard American diet which I forever
abbreviate as the sad and the standard
American diet is effectively with or
without food pyramid the standard
American diet is what is killing people
and um so so the question is where did
the standard American diet come from the
standard American diet was nothing more
than the solution to a business problem
so the business problem was we need
something where we can produce lots of
food so you had to have this quantity
issue right so that gets to part of the
problem right we have too many people at
the time who are undernourished we can't
have that anymore everyone needs to be
adequately nourished so we need scale
the next thing is exactly your point it
can't cost too much so we have to be
able to do it at scale and it has to be
cheap the third question or problem
statement was it has to be non
perishable and
portable right so you can't have
abundant food if it needs to be consumed
10 minutes after it's made so it has to
be sort of non-
perishable um the third sorry the fourth
and final parameter I guess there would
be it has to taste really good we have
to make food very palatable this again
it's just part of a business and
marketing strategy
and what I argue I guess is that the
solution to those four things is what we
have today like we when you when you
walk through a grocery store all you're
looking at is the solution space to a
problem statement called those four
questions and it's called the standard
American diet now with or without a
pyramid I'm going to just argue that 95%
of people if they go through life eating
the standard American diet with no
attention to how much of it they eat or
maybe certain things in it that they
shouldn't eat are going to be unhealthy
there there just aren't that many people
that have the genes to avoid the dous
consequences of the standard American
diet left
unchecked and therefore
yeah well so that was the least
conspiratorial account of the origin of
the American well I mean that I've heard
and that that's fine that that's
perfectly appropriate I mean I do think
that we could give the devil is due and
say the consequences that we have today
of this epidemic of obesity was in fact
the consequence of solving a problem too
effectively I mean the middle of
supermarkets the outside edges of
supermarkets don't contain generally
highly processed carbohydrates let's say
but the center does and they are cheap
and they are delicious and they are
easily provided they are portable and
they are and and so that did solve the
the problem of undernutrition on the
pure caloric front so we're victims of
our own success in that sense and I
suppose it's it's perfectly reasonable
to dispense with the you know the
accusations that the food pyramid was
nothing but a marketing scheme because
it did have to solve these four problems
that you described and did so yeah I
mean I think what I I I don't want I
certainly don't want to give the food
industry a pass I mean we can we can
certainly delve into that which is to
say there's no question that data have
been suppressed right there's no no
question that um we're not having an
honest discussion about the following so
are all calories created equal from an
energy balance standpoint sure at an
isocaloric level if I give you 1,000
calories of Coca-Cola versus 1,000
calories of baked potatoes versus 1,000
calories of steak it will have the same
impact on your energy balance but it
won't have the same impact on your
appetite and your ability to
subsequently eat I mean to me that's
that's the most um I think probably
offensive aspect of where the food
industry has failed right so the food
industry didn't set out to kill people
any more than the tobacco industry did
where these people are effectively
liable is in that they're not honest
about the discussion until you know it
becomes too late and the reality of it
is junk food I think hijacks your normal
appetite centers and I know people who
are very good at working within those
confines so I know people who can eat
junk food in small amounts and continue
to eat nutritious food and stay in over
overall energy balance they can track
their calories perfectly and they can
have a couple of Oreos and some ice
cream here and there and drink your soda
here and there and they're all fine what
I can just tell you clinically taking
care of ual people who are not
robots on average more people than not
struggle with that and with the
introduction of these very hyper
palatable foods that kind of hijack your
appetite uh it tends to produce
overeating and ultimately that's the
problem at hand here when people overeat
from whichever part of the pyramid
they're going to overeat from we're
going to get down that whole Cascade we
just spoke about it just so happened
that I think the things at the bottom of
the pyramid are the things that are
making it easier for you to be
disconnected from the true driver of
appetite and there are lots of
hypotheses here right there are some
hypotheses that we are kind of hardwired
to get a certain amount of nutrient
value and as the nutrient value of our
food
deteriorates we have to eat more food we
have to eat more calories to get the
certain nutrient density there are
people who argue we're we're hardwired
to get a certain amount of protein and
as we're diluting protein content in
food we're eating more calories to get
food in other words and by the way I
don't think any one of these
particularly uh is necessarily the
explanation my guess is it could be a
lot of the above but it's probably the
case that we you know we are
opportunistic omnivores right we grew up
you know we we evolved eating pretty
much anything we could but we didn't eat
that much much of it because we didn't
really have that much of it and we were
wildly active when you eliminate those
two consequences being opportunistic
omnivores is not working for most of us
we have to be more selective uh to push
back against the amazing success of our
civilization yeah well it is a
remarkable thing that you can walk into
your local Starbucks and there's one on
every corner and get an 850 calorie
muffin for for essentially nothing and
that it is delicious and that it is
addictive and it is a Hallmark of a
certain kind of success I'm going to go
sideways here for a minute and CU I have
something I suppose that's slightly more
on the personal side to ask you about so
as you may or may not know my daughter
was very ill with a plethora of
immunological problems including very
serious juvenile arthritis and that was
it just about killed her it did destroy
two of her joints and she had another 38
that were affected and so she was always
in lot of pain and we I looked into the
role the diet played in arthritis
through the scientific literature for a
couple of years and found two things and
and they were somewhat contradictory and
one was that there was no real evidence
that any specific elements of diet had
been linked to juvenile arthritis
specifically but and this was a major
but if people who were arthritic fasted
completely
then their arthritic symptoms often
disappeared and so I thought that had
something to do with the consequences of
fasting but then my daughter started to
play and my wife as well very intensely
with the diet we went to a nutritionist
who recommended elimination dot at one
point because she did notice that she
would react to strawberries and oranges
we could that and within a day her
thumbs would swell or her toes would
swell and so we knew there were some
things she was eating we had her tested
for immunological reaction to food but
when we tested her she showed a hyper
reaction to virtually everything they
tested her for and we concluded at that
point well there's no damn way she could
be reacting to everything she's
eating well she went on this Elimination
Diet and showed a bit of reduction in
symptom but the Elimination Diet made no
sense like there was no Rhyme or Reason
to what you could eat and what you
couldn't eat and so she started to
experiment with more restricted diets
and eventually settled on discovered
that if she only ate beef and it turns
out for her it has to be beef that isn't
aged then all of her immunological
symptoms disappeared and then my wife
and I started playing with that diet and
so I've only been eating meat for beef
fundamentally for almost five years now
and I've talked to hundreds of people
and we've had messages from thousands of
people showing that this is first of all
radically effective as a weight loss
strategy and also seems to to produce
remarkable effects on the general
disease symptom front back in November
of
2021 there was a study published by a
Harvard Group which wasn't a perfect
study because it was retrospective
self-report but they followed 20 they
assessed 24 2500 people who had been on
a carnivore diet for 6 months and showed
something approximating a 90% reduction
in all disease symptoms and was the only
scientific paper I ever read where the
surprise of the researchers was palpable
between the lines in the in the
scientific writing because you know in a
scientific article all that emotion
negative or positive is pretty much
ironed out but these people were so
shocked by what they found that it
couldn't help leaking into the document
and so well this has been quite
surprising to me because I never
imagined in my wildest dreams number one
that you could just live on me number
and number two that it would have such a
cuty effect so for me guy lost 52 lbs in
7 months I went from 212 lbs to 165
which is exactly what I weighed when I
was 23 and I've maintained that weight
since I can put on muscle mous with no
problem even though I'm 62 I had a host
of inflammatory conditions some of which
were quite serious including peripheral
Uvis which sometimes blinds people in my
right eye and it disappeared completely
along with psoriasis and gastric reflux
disorder and interestingly enough um gum
disease which is technically incurable
which is linked to cardiovascular
degeneration and which has gone away
100% in my case according to multiple
measures that my dentists have taken and
so and I've talked to many people who've
lost like a 100 pounds in a year you
know because they come to my talks and
who are just beside themselves so to
speak as a consequence of experimenting
with this diet so well so that's the
story it's very strange I don't talk
about it that much because I'm not a
nutritionist and because I'm still Shell
Shocked by it but I'll tell you it's
something to be 60 and to have the same
essential body morphology that I had
when I was 23 and that had all
disappeared from me in my early
50s yeah you're not the first person
I've heard this story from Jordan and I
have to be honest with you I just don't
know how to explain it um
the weight loss by the way is not the
harder part to explain right so the more
restrictive any diet is the more one
loses weight on average right so I I it
wouldn't surprise me if we put a person
on the all potato diet if they would
lose weight whereas if you put somebody
on the no lettuce diet nobody's going to
lose an ounce so more restrictive diets
ketogenic diets which are not as
restrictive as what you're doing are
also very effective for weight loss by
the way so is a zero fat diet now uh
it's a UNP itable diet and I don't think
it's particularly healthy diet when you
start restricting fat that much the more
interesting question to me
is H and you know and I could certainly
understand if you would say I have no
desire to experiment further by
introducing other elements to see if I
can preserve this phenotype but the most
interesting question to me is what are
the other Foods out there that you might
be able to consume or in the case of
your daughter right like is it I'm
obviously interested in that too but I
what I have found because I have now and
then tried to eat carbohydrates what I
have found is that if I eat any of them
I start to Crave them intensely if I
don't eat them at all I they don't
bother me assuming and this goes to the
calorie restriction
issue um one of the ways of maintaining
yourself on a keto diet or a carnivore
diet let's say is to make sure you're
never hungry and I eat a lot of meat and
a lot of high fat meat and so I'm never
hungry and I don't think that I'm
calorie restricted at all because you
know I can eat well a Tomahawk Steak
sometimes in one sitting which is about
35 ounces of meat I never get hungry and
I eat high-fat carnivore snacks too what
I found is as long as I'm never hungry
then I I not inclined to cheat but if I
do try something like an introduction of
carbohydrates first of all some of my
symptoms come back right away like the
girds and I start craving like mad so
well so that's my is it is is it all
carbohydrates or um like for example if
you introduce vegetables uh non-starchy
vegetables what happens both symptom
wise and uh craving wise yeah well for a
while I was eating nothing but meat and
greens MH but I still had some residual
symptoms my wife has a host of
immunological problems that are somewhat
lowle
and I have a different host and Michaela
seemed to get all of
them and so you know maybe we're
absurdly sensitive for reasons that
wouldn't be true of other people but
it's definitely the case that I do
better and believe me this isn't
something I particularly
want it is the case that I do better if
I just stick to beef now could I have
pork and chicken um I had a very
terrible bout of ill health and I'm
disinclined to do a lot of
experimentation although I'll probably
try again in the future sometime but I
do know that beef Works we've been
hypothesizing internally in our family
for what it's worth is that the reason
that beef works and that other ruminant
animals bis and so forth uh um lamb goat
is because they they they process what
they eat through so many stomachs that
by the time it is actually turned into
meat there's pretty much nothing else
there so it's it's a very purified form
of nutritional uh uh very well very
purified form of food now like I said
that's anecdotal and this is partly why
I don't talk about it but but I can tell
you after you've talked to a thousand
people who tell you the same anecdote
you don't have an anecdote anymore you
have a hypothesis and it's really quite
something seeing these people who show
me pictures of what they looked like a
year ago and you know they were carrying
around an extra person with them and
they're still Shell Shocked by the
transformation you know cuz it's really
something to lose say 150 lbs in a year
and so well um I don't know what to make
of that I do know that it's been the
diet has actually been rejuvenating for
my wife and I like its effect on muscle
tone has to be seen to be believed and
that's true even though both of us are
60 like my wife is in better shape from
a musculature perspective now at 63 than
she was when she was 40 and she was a
very physically fit person who was EXC
in constantly and who is in pretty damn
good shape and to see that reverse
rather than just you know stop
deteriorating I don't really know what
to make of
it I would love it to be studied
prospectively I'm I'm very curious as to
what's going on in particular with with
that I mean there are there are lots of
data out there showing the efficacy of a
ketogenic diet in the amelioration of
type 2
diabetes um I I do think I mean look
when it comes to type type two diabetes
any amount of weight loss is going to
produce a benefit but it seems that a
ketogenic diet has the easiest um
compliance and uh there might be
something to the fact that it's kind of
removing the thing of which there is an
excess right by by at least taking away
the thing that is in most excess uh it's
easier to Kickstart that uh a fast of
course is also a great way to Kickstart
that right something about taking away
taking glycogen levels down in the liver
and the muscle makes this
easier well that the advantage too of
the diet the carnivore diet in
particular is because you can eat as
much as you want it's actually not a
diet you know the problem with diets is
that they require privation and they
require almost continual privation and
then they also tend to produce a yo-yo
effect and that's partly because if you
get in a fight with your hypothalamus
which drives hunger you're going to lose
because it's there to make damn sure you
don't starve and the probability that
you can override it for any length of
time well it's very very low and that
probably varies from person to person
for all sorts of reasons but you don't
want to get in a scrap with your lower
level motivational systems now you know
if I ever start to crave a banana split
for example I can just eat another five
or six ounces of steak and then I don't
care it's not like it wouldn't taste
good you know but it doesn't preoccupy
me the way it would if I was is hungry
I've really noticed this when I go into
grocery stores because if I go into a
grocery store after having consumed
enough meat then the provision of this
infinite display of delicious foods
really doesn't affect me much but boy if
I ever go into a grocery store when I'm
hungry that's quite the pain in the neck
because everything's delightful and
tempting you know so the fact that you
can eat enough or even as much as you
want on a keto or carnivore diet does
seem to distinguish it in some ways from
the diets that depend more particularly
on mere calorie restriction although
I've seen a subset of people on
ketogenic diets who gain weight so they
somehow are eating past their necessary
uh their their their energy Point um uh
I was on a ketogenic diet for three
years actually I used to write about in
fact when I started blogging in 2010
2011 uh it was basically to to I was
mostly talking about nutrition and for
three years minus one day on my wife's
birthday one one day in that three years
I had seven pieces of dessert but minus
that one day I was in a state of ketosis
for three years um and yeah in many ways
I was the poster child for it like it
the the efficacy in me was out of this
world um what did it do for
you oh I mean I lost 40 lbs I you know
was probably I mean just from a body
composition standpoint was you know by
DEA which is the gold standard about 72%
body fat every metric of uh every
biomarker you could measure or possibly
care about was in the you know even by
my standards which are not to consider
what's optimal but to consider what's
exceptional everything was great uh even
things that historically people think
you can't do on a ketogenic diet like
lots of intense
exercise uh certainly initially I
couldn't do much of that but within
about 6 months I had regained much of my
exercise ability and by 18 months I I
had no certainly no discernable
reduction in uh extreme exercise
performance again I don't have the
counterfactual You could argue that
that's still lesser than what it would
have been had I not been aen but you
know so people sometimes say well Peter
why aren't you on the ketogenic diet
anymore why did you stop in
2014 uh it largely came down to I think
just not wanting to be restrictive
anymore and uh wanting to kind of you
know as my at the time daughter was
getting a little bit older it was you
know sort of wanting to enjoy more of
the foods that I was was limiting but
the reality of it is like I don't uh you
know I'm certainly not as lean as I was
when I was on that diet yeah yeah yeah
well the other thing I noticed this is
also very cool and it's very important
to me personally so I noticed that as I
got older my ability to concentrate when
I was reading was deteriorating so when
I was 25 30 when if I picked up a book
and read it I would shut everything else
out and I would REM concentrate on focus
on attend to what I was reading read
every word and understand it with no
problem but that started to deteriorate
as I got older and I noticed that it
took an increasing amount of effort to
shut everything off and that instead of
reading as deeply as I was I was sort of
glancing at the words and when I started
this carnivore diet that reversed and I
can now I think I actually think this is
true I think I can read faster and more
efficiently than I could when I was in
my 20s and I was pretty good at it when
I was in my 20s and so the other thing
that I've noticed too is that I don't
have periods of time this was quite a
problem for me and it might have had
something to do with my immunological
problems is that I would get
hypoglycemic and lose the ability to
concentrate and get what do they call it
hangry you know hungry and angry and
irritable and that would happen several
times a day probably because I was
working tooo much but in any case that
is gone
completely and I really don't miss it
you know I wake up in the morning with a
stable mood and my mood doesn't VAR much
throughout the day I'm also much more
stress tolerant and able to Res re
bounce back from stressors faster and in
terms of uh endurance you know there
were lots of times over the last three
years when I was walking 9 to 12 miles a
day on a carnivore diet now I wasn't
running you know but my experience is
that I'm stronger and I have more
stamina than I did 10 years ago and
that's quite something given that I'm
now 62 that's a good direction you know
it's one thing like I said it's one
thing to Halt the aging process but it's
another thing entirely to see it start
to reverse and so you know we don't know
anything about a straight carnivore diet
very little and no one has done a
perspective study it's one that I'm
actually thinking about setting up
funding for if I can find researchers
who are interested
because um there's something there and
it was certainly established by that
initial study at Harvard so if you know
anyone who's interested in doing that
you could always hook them up with me
sure I I some folks there are some folks
that come to mind
actually okay okay all right so do you
want to talk a little bit about the
other more common diseases that you deal
with in the book you talk about heart
disease if we've touched on heart
disease you talk about cancer um
neurologic IC degeneration Alzheimer's
for example let's walk through that
domain a little bit if if that would be
okay with you sure we like to
start um let's start with cancer
everyone's
favorite yeah I I think um you know
cancer is the second leading cause of
death uh in in the United States and
globally um of the what I describe as
these four horsemen of death uh
cardiovascular disease cancer neurod
degenerative disease and the metabolic
diseases that we've already talked about
um cancer hits its peak first so the
other diseases rise monotonically with
aging uh cancer actually peaks in late
middle age um so so cancer would be the
leading cause of chronic death uh or you
know chronic diseases of Aging uh in the
40s and 50s and 60s before it's
supplanted by cardiovascular disease and
even neurog generative
disease um if you go back to the year I
was
born and you ask the question what is
the probability that a person with
metastatic cancer I.E cancer that has
spread from its primary organ to a
distant organ what's the probability
they're going to be alive in 10 years uh
the answer was
z% nobody was going to survive that
today the answer is about five %c may
maybe a little bit higher but it's it's
really not been an enormous uh source of
success so so let's talk about what the
bright spots are the bright spots are
leukemias lymphomas testicular cancer uh
these are areas where there has been
great progress and your survival today
is so much higher than it was 50 years
ago when you talk about the big Killers
though which are lung cancer prostate
cancer breast cancer colon cancer p
pancreatic cancer those are the top five
causes of cancer
death median survival the length of time
you survive has increased by as much as
a year if not more but overall survival
has not this is a very important thing
to understand the risk of being dead in
10 years if that cancer has spread is
the same as it was 50 years ago so if
all that's the you suppose do you do you
suppose that's a possible consequence of
the presence of cancer being a marker
for like cumulative systemic failure is
that it it's if there's cancer somewhere
is it an indicator that many things have
gone wrong at many levels and so even if
you treat the cancer the probability
that that's going to be life saving is
quite low or is it just a consequence of
the tremendous capacity of metastatic
cancers to spread
so there's a couple of things going on
for cancer to take place um so
so the first critical step of a cancer
is a genetic mutation has to happen and
largely speaking these fall into two
categories there are genes that are uh
promoting cancer growth and then there
are genes that suppress cancer growth so
anytime you get mutations in one of
those systems sys it becomes
oncogenic now
fortunately when a cell becomes
cancerous it starts to let out clues
that it is not a normal cell so when a
breast cell goes from being a normal
mamory cell to a cancerous mamory
cell it starts to look a little bit
different and the immune system our
immune system the cellular immune system
uh is very good at patrolling the body
for signs of things that are not self
that's what it's programmed to do so the
it's a very beautiful way to think about
it but the immune system is not
programmed to recognize bad things it's
PR it's programmed to recognize things
that are not self this is done through
something called thymic selection when
we're you know basically very young so
uh and by the way too much of that
problem leads to autoimmunity so you
know you can think about this through
your own personal story right which is
there's a very fine balance here too
much of knowing what is you know uh not
self and too little of that are both
equally
bad so there are always some cells that
recognize this in fact Steve Rosenberg
who I did my postto with uh recently
published some really amazing data which
I I find one of the most staggering
statistics of all of cancer and also one
one of the most hopeful which is that
80% of epithelial tumors epithelial
tumors are the ones that kill people
that's the solid organ stuff the breast
colon prostate Etc 80% of those tumors
produce what are called novel
neoantigens meaning they produce
peptides small proteins that are not
self and are recognized by the immune
system as not
self the problem is the reason those a %
of patients don't go into spontaneous
remission is they can't mount a strong
enough immune response to that so it's
sort of like having some immune cells
that recognize you have a virus but not
enough that they can actually kill the
virus and ultimately the virus kills
them to your broader question which is
if you're listening to this what do you
do about it it starts to me with what
are the two most clear en environmental
triggers of cancer and how do you avoid
them and then secondly what's the rest
of your strategy so um when it comes to
heart disease and neurodegenerative
disease and metabolic disease which are
the other three
Horsemen our ability to incorporate
prevention is so significant that it
plays The Lion's Share of our strategy
because we have such an understanding of
the risk factors for Alzheimer's disease
the risk risk factors for metabolic
disease and the risk factors for heart
disease your prevention strategy is not
doing those 25 things or minimizing how
much you're doing those things with
cancer there's really just two big
things smoking and obesity insulin
resistance now the literature would just
say obesity but I add insulin resistance
because I think that the literature is
too blunt a tool to tease out what's
really going on and what's really
driving it I think is the inflammatory
and um metabolic I.E the high growth
factors such as insulin that are coming
with most but not all cases of obesity
so what we really want to avoid is being
metabolically unhealthy and smoking but
here's the thing so that insulin insulin
overproduction also in your opinion
facilitates cancer uh uh origination or
or or or prop cancer has I don't think
yeah I think it's a propagation issue
not initiation y y and we know that
because there are more than 20 cancers
whose risk for whom your risk goes up by
about a 2X Factor if you're obese and I
think the only thing that makes sense in
that sense in understanding that
observation is the inflammatory and
progrowth environment that that is in
that individual so do we want to avoid
that absolutely but but my point is
there are think of how many people who
are non-smokers who are metabolically
healthy who still get cancer that's a
very long list of people so I wouldn't
be able to hang my hat on this as well
my anti-cancer strategy is not smoking
and being metabolically healthy and
hoping that that's enough we have to
have another tool in this toolkit and
that tool is a very controversial one
but nevertheless I think it's important
and it's very aggressive screening and
the reason for this is another
observation that I don't think gets
enough attention which is when you
consider two different individuals with
the same cancer but at different stages
who are treated with the exact same
treatment their survivals are very
different so if you take a person with
stage four colon cancer which means the
cancer has spread to say the liver and
you treat them with the same cocktail of
drugs that you give a person at stage
three cancer where it's just spread from
the colon to the lymph nodes but no
further at least to the naked eyee the
survival for the people for whom it's
spread to the liver is 0% at 10 years
whereas the ones to the lymph nodes it's
going to be about 60 to 65% at the same
period of time a fundamental difference
they're getting the same treatment so
it's the difference between treating
somebody when they have a billion Cells
versus a 100 billion or a trillion cells
and the problem is that there's more
mutational bird burden the more cancer
you have you have more Escape mechanisms
for the cancer that's probably the best
explanation for it all of the and we
could do this analysis for all other
types of cancer like breast cancer Etc
what it points to is early detection is
essential it so what does that mean
practically what what do people have to
do with their physicians in order to
ensure that they're being optimally
screened for for the possibility of
cancer and at what age does that start
to become more crucial it's very
difficult for me to provide a blanket
statement because even when I'm talking
about this with my patients I have a
long discussion with them about the
challenges of doing this so let's put
aside the obvious challenge which is
cost none of the advanced types of
screening um or working at the advanced
rate are going to be covered by
insurance right so in the United States
uh it's recently been changed to 45 from
50 for the initial col oscopy that's an
excellent step in the right direction I
still think it's about 5 years too late
I think even for a person without a
family history of colon cancer I would
recommend and at least for our patients
would would recommend screening at to
begin at 40 instead of
45 the frequency with which it's not
cheaper it's not cheaper for the
insurance companies to screen than it is
to pay for advanced cancer treatment in
Hopeless cases oh it certainly is but
you're uh you're confounding some
something which is at least in the
Canadian Health Care system that might
make more sense because the government
owns the risk for life so at least if I
don't and I can't you despite the fact
that I grew up in Toronto I can't really
speak to the Canadian Healthcare System
with any Authority but at least that's
something Canada has going for it which
is when you're 40 getting a colonoscopy
or when you're 50 getting a colonoscopy
that catches a little poop that costs
nothing to remove and prevent it from
going to cancer uh
you still own that life and that risk 10
years later in the US that's not the
case in the US people are never really
owned from a risk perspective by one
entity for very long so there's much
much less incentive in our system
unfortunately to truly invest in
prevention and that's a you know if we
were to talk about the structural
problems of the US Healthcare System uh
that might be the single most important
one well the other problem on the
prevention front you know is that
prevention isn't dramatic because you
get no credit for for preventing a 100
things that don't happen you know if you
cure something that's pretty dramatic
because someone's ill and you cure them
and the fact that they're no longer ill
is self-evident but if you stop
something cold in its tracks all that
happens is that people pay attention to
other problems and other let's say more
uh showy and noticeable cure
and so it's not only hard to fund
prevention it's also hard to Market it
right because you can't give credit to
the people who've Managed IT and so
that's a that's a big structural problem
like it it seems one of the logical
conclusions from our conversation was
that it would have been a much better
investment on the government side and on
the social side to have put a fair chunk
of the money that was spent on cancer
treatment into prevention of the entire
range of diseases that we've been
discussing and with a with primarily
with a focus likely on what on
Obesity as the number one is it is it
obesity do you think that's the number
one concern across all these classes
regenerative disease uh oh yes yes if
you're going to say well it's metabolic
disease right so obesity is just a proxy
for that but yes metabolic disease would
be the you know one that feeds and
amplifies all the others um but there
are other things that we haven't
explored like I don't think we have done
a decent job remotely of understanding
going just going back to cancer what the
impact is of other environmental toxins
in cancer and the reason I think it's so
important in cancer to look at this is
because smoking and obesity only explain
so much of it so in other words the I
can't tell you what the number is but
it's knowable and it's large the number
of people who get cancer who are neither
smokers nor have obesity or insulin
resistance and so there's still a big
fraction of people for whom something
else is driving their cancer and I
suspect there are other environmental
toxins whether they be pesticides
whether they be you know chemicals in
the gr like there are other things out
there that might not produce a large
enough signal to show up either because
of their ubiquity or because the direct
impact is not as large and the fact that
we don't know this to me is
problematic right so that's another
variant in some ways of prevention to
identify additional mutagenic agents we
already know about that on that smoking
front but and then to take them out of
the environment so that the diseases
don't occur to begin with let's switch
by the way I do I do want to I do want
to say one thing about what you said
Jordan that is very true and there's no
disease for which it's more tragic than
with the the dementing diseases
specifically Alzheimer's disease so if
you want to look at the amount of
research that's gone into treatment
versus prevention it's in dollars
spent you'd need scientific notation to
tell you what that ratio is like it's
999999999 to 0 it's not even close and
the net result has been abysmal so there
is no disease for which we have less to
show for the work that's gone into it
than Alzheimer's disease right we have a
couple of approv drugs the
other go go ahead yeah we have a couple
of approved drugs that have virtually no
efficacy at best they might slow the
rate of progression zero reversal and
yet I think it's Crystal Clear that your
trajectory towards Alzheimer's disease
is probably much more malleable than
your trajectory towards cancer and we
should have a very clear Playbook on
what that looks like given how difficult
it is to treat that disease once it's
present right well I guess the other
problem on the prevention front is that
it's it's more difficult to monetize pre
ition it's quite straightforward to
monetize drugs to cure or to not cure as
long as they're administered to enough
people but how do you monetize
prevention and and people might say well
everything can't be about money it's
like well without money you can't market
and without marketing you can't
communicate and so there's all sorts of
obstacles that are quite subtle in the
way of mounting an effective prevention
campaign and but it does it certainly
seems if you let's let's close with two
questions one might be if you
could seize control of Public Health
spending on the research and public
policy front where would you devote the
bulk of resources now I mean like one
example might be well you know would we
start a campaign to reduce the
consumption of carbohydrate especially
sugar but but but we talked about other
elements of prevention as well if we're
going to spend our money research money
and our Public Health money efficiently
and get the most bang for the buck where
do you think we should spend it and what
evidence do you have to support
that it's really hard to say because
this is just as much a behavioral
question as it is uh a scientific or
medical question again the numbers point
back to exercise Jordan there's no
ambiguity about that right you're going
to get more benefit in a person's health
if you get their V2 Max High you put
lots of muscle mass on them and you
create a high degree of strength and
that's going to be true for men women
young old it doesn't matter there is no
exception to this Rule and therefore um
you know I would put most of my
resources from a public health
standpoint into how do you do that how
do you make exercise something that is
interwoven from preschool onward at a
level that is truly efficacious uh and
that's going to not just mean getting
people to exercise it's going to be
figuring out ways to change the
environment that supports being active
more often so that you're being active
and not even when you're not exercising
uh but it's also going to involve
understanding that everybody's different
there are some people who hate exercise
and what do you need to do to make it
more enjoyable for those people what
kind of financial incentives do you put
in place for people to exercise because
I really do believe carrots can be more
effective than sticks here and uh you
know simply you know I mean we talk
people are are sitting here talking
about you know Universal basic income as
a potential way uh to alleviate some of
the societal problems well if we're
going to be paying people maybe paying
them to exercise um and providing you
know a way for for a really good
incentive around this because it's going
to obviously save cost but I think more
importantly improve the quality of a
person's life no individual cares about
the cost right because they're not
bearing the cost so that's a you know
the arguments around that I don't think
matter I think the only thing that
matters is can we have you do something
that's going to improve the quality of
your
life wonder wonder what would happen if
we took kids out for a 15minute walk
every morning as part of the school
curriculum and made that habitual you
know it'd be good for the kids too
because they might be able to sit down
and attend a bit more if they actually
had a bit of exercise before they were
required to sit and do nothing for six
hours so you know to build to start
building those habits of activity uh in
youth so that they
I mean I I would get I would get rid of
chairs I would get rid of chairs in
schools every kid would have a standing
desk I mean there's sitting is just a
it's not a particularly productive thing
in the position we do it in right I mean
sitting in a squatted position is fine
uh but this the angle that we're sitting
at is really it it's it's it's not
conducive to to Great biomechanics later
in life so we you know if you watch a
child your kids are probably too old now
but mine are not I can see the change in
body mechanics as they go through
through more and more time in chairs and
that's true of adult well right well
well obviously what we're doing in
schools is training people to be
sedentary yeah obviously I mean that
might be the most fundamental impact of
the education system you know I read an
interesting book years ago called
systematics by a man named John Gaul and
it's a set of aphorisms about how
systems work you know and one of the
aphorisms which I never forgot was the
system does not do what its name says it
does
and so when you analyze a system for
example one of the reasons I think that
universities get away with charging
tuition fees that are like absolutely
unreasonable by any standard is that you
have a pretty decent chance of meeting
your lifetime mate if you go to
university and so it might be that the
fundamental function of universities is
to Aid in the process of assortative
mating like systems are very complex and
hypothetically the education system
educates kids but what but its
fundamental function for all we know
might be turned to turn people into
sedentary and obese adults CU we don't
know right we we we're not smart enough
to to analy the behavior of these
complex systems let's end with one final
thing we touched briefly on the issue of
emotional health and so tell me Tell
just tell me your thoughts on that in
general what are your recommendations in
outlive in your book and and how do you
how do you associate the issue of
psychological and emotional health with
with the well with exercise and diet for
example or any of the other lifestyle
modification processes that we've
discussed so I think emotional health
ties into this longevity equation in
many ways so you can start at a very
extreme end
uh a low enough state of emotional
health can be a direct threat to your
life so again the most extreme extreme
example of that would be suicide but if
you walk back from suicide we talk about
parasuicide we talk about all the
different behaviors that people engage
in that are slow suicides I can't speak
to what the statistics are in Canada but
in the United States and I I suspect you
know these more than I do Jordan uh if
if we look at three categories of deaths
of Despair suicide overdose and alcohol
rated death uh so curosis things like
that um the deaths of Despair have been
increasing at anywhere from 10 to 20%
year on year on year over the past four
or five years so we just that's brutal
yeah so just last last year was the
first year that overdose took more than
a 100,000 lives in the United States so
yeah well you know it's an open question
how many people on the edge of of
depressive collapse were tipped over
that edge by the lockdowns and the
prolonged social isolation and the
increase in fear you know up in Toronto
I still see people and uh in La too it
was quite noticeable I was there
yesterday today I still still still see
people cowering behind their masks and
know you have to have been made pretty
chronically afraid to still be doing
that and the the uh cost to People's
Health of the fear campaign that drove
that drove the lockdowns we're going to
see that I mean I don't know how that's
contributing to the excess death
statistic I think it would be very
difficult to say that those statistics I
rattled off aren't impacted by Co so
what's going to be interesting is to see
how that plays out going forward my
point of course is that these deaths of
Despair are a very extreme example of
how emotional health impacts longevity
directly right here it's just truncating
lifespan way too soon in fact um
overdose is now the leading cause of
death in the United States for people
age 10 to
55 wow wow oh that's terrible so and so
so what do you see on the prevention
front there or do you have well let's go
even one layer further cuz I'm sure
there's someone listening to this who
says well look that's not me I don't
drink to excess I would never touch an
illicit drug and I'm in no danger of
killing myself so that that means
emotional health is checked and I would
say no not really because that's just
the first layer let's go one layer
deeper I think the next layer is how
many people because of their
relationship with themselves are unable
to self-care
if we're really going to be honest about
it how often do we engage in not what
would rise to the level of quote unquote
harmful Behavior but certainly things
that are not in our best care eating a
little bit too much not exercising
enough not sleeping well you know
engaging in behaviors uh or failing to
engage in healthy behaviors now I again
I see this constantly with patients
where
it's not that they don't know what to do
it's not that they don't know that they
should exercise but if you really push
them they have a negative relationship
with themselves that is preventing them
from taking care of themselves and I
would say that the impact on qu on
length of Life there and quality of life
is much bigger than the deaths of
Despair but it's much harder to
quantify so then I go even one step
further and say okay well you're not in
category one where you're an immediate
threat to your life because of this
emotional uh your emotional health and
you're not even at the point where
you're failing to take care of yourself
but now you maybe land
where you're you're just not happy
you're your your relationships suck
right you're a you're a lousy father
you're a lousy husband you're a lousy
parent you know any of these
things and you're basically living
without a sense of why right you're
you're you're not um you know as as
Esther Perell put it to me what is the
purpose of living longer if you're
unhappy and I think that that's probably
the biggest circle and and that's to me
one of the most interesting ones here uh
and and again for me personally the the
one I wanted to explore the most in
myself which was uh how much of this
obsession with longevity is about
figuring out how to not die versus
understanding how to
live and so what what have you concluded
on the treatment front in regards to to
that set of problems or the prevention
front let's
say well again it's worth caveat that
everything that I write about in the
book I come to it with some lens of
expertise right I mean it's what I do
for a living it's what I've spent more
than a decade researching uh you know I
can I can speak with some Authority
about cancer and heart disease and
dementia and exercise and nutrition
when it comes to this particular issue I
have no expertise I come at this through
the lens of a
patient and therefore I think everything
I say must be taken with the
understanding that it's somewhat
anecdotal um and therefore needs to be
explored with with professionals who I
think can bring to it for example the
expertise you could bring to it but I'll
tell you what I've learned I've learned
that most people
probably have some degree of unresolved
business in their childhood that has
produced
adaptations and in some cases many of
those adaptations are very good and
should continue but some of those
adaptations are negative and that is
malleable right so there's there's kind
of this view of Hope which
is you don't have to throw out the baby
with the bath water you can again in my
case you can take some of those
adaptations which produce you know hard
work discipline all of these things but
you can get rid of some of the negative
ones such as the negative selft talk um
the perfectionism all these other things
that created a very negative impact on
myself and those around me
so this requires very hard work and
unfortunately um it's not something that
lends itself to the faint of heart
unfortunately at least in my experience
I much more Curious at your
experience many people need to be at a
local
Minima you know not necessarily the rock
bottom but close to a rock bottom to
start to probe those things well I I can
I can tell you some of the things that
I've learned uh partly as a consequence
of public lecturing and and speaking to
people constantly about how they might
straighten up their life the first thing
I would say is we've run a series of
studies on a set of programs I designed
with my students and my my previous
graduates my my graduate supervisor
Robert Peele and Daniel Higgins Peele
was my supervisor and Higgins my student
we developed a suite of exercises called
The self-authoring Suite they're at
selfauthoring.com
and the past authoring program helps you
write an autobiography and clear up that
excess
baggage and the present authoring
program helps you analyze your faults
and your virtues rather programmatically
so that you can start to generate a
strategy to rectify your faults and to
capitalize on your virtues and the
future authoring program which we've
studied most intently helps you develop
a vision for the next five years and if
we have people do the future authoring
program before they enter University if
they do 90 minutes of developing a
vision 90 minutes that's all no
preparation with no one reviewing what
they've written the probability that
they'll drop out Falls 50% and their
grade point average goes up up
35% and it is tied to precisely what you
described is that people need a reason
to live and I also in this exercise we
help people break down the reasons to
live and this touches on another point
that you made regarding relationships
you can't be healthy psychologically in
the absence of a network of functional
relationships you need a partner you
need a family you need friends you need
business colleagues you have to be
nested in a functional social hierarchy
and so we walk people through this
process of vision
development we ask them what they would
like to have in 5 years if they could
have what they wanted and needed we
asked them how catastrophic their lives
would be in five years if they let their
bad habits get out of control that sort
of sets the parameters right don't do
this and do this and then we ask them
seven
questions what do you want in an
intimate
relationship what do you want in your
friendships what do you want for your
job and your career how are you going to
educate yourself how are you going to
take care of yourself mentally and
physically what are you going to do with
your time outside of work that's
productive and generous how are you
going to shoulder some civic
responsibility uh I think that covers
the fundamental domains those are places
that people generally Find meaning in
their lives and the upshot of all this
is that almost no one has an explicit
strategy for their life and that's a
catastrophe what do they say the people
perish without a vision this is
literally the case and this is precisely
what we're talking about it but it turns
out just as in the case of exercise you
said you can get a walloping Advantage
from just going from Z to 3 hours going
from no plan at all to a hastily
contrived 90minut plan well like I said
that has that stops half the kids from
dropping out of
University and so there are there's a
large body of research showing that
these sort of writing exercises to clean
up your past and to structure your
future are salutary on the psychological
and the physiological front so you could
imagine there's a three-prong approach
to to health span
right sufficient
exercise appropriate diet and the
development of something like a
comprehensive account of and vision for
your life yeah and that would be
relatively inexpensive and all things
considered relatively easy to implement
so so you never know maybe we'll get
smart enough to move hard in that
direction as a society over the next
couple of decades so I guess is there
anything else you wouldd like to tell
people before we close we're going to
turn just so everybody's listening knows
we're going to and watching we're going
to turn to the Daily wire plus platform
I'm going to talk to Dr Adia for
additional half an hour about the
development of his interest in these
areas over his lifespan that's usually
what I do in in that half an hour period
but is there anything else Dr Adia that
you would like to relate to the viewers
and and listeners before we close no I
think uh I think those are three great
principles there and um I guess the only
final thing I would say and it kind of
ties a little bit into the last one is
there is an exercise I have uh my
patients do uh called the marginal
decade exercise so you write down on a
piece of paper your age so I'm 50 and
you draw a line extending across the
page and you tick off at 10 year
increments so 60 70 80 90 and then I do
the same exercise for my kids so I have
a 15-year-old girl 9-year-old boy
six-year-old boy and I tick those out at
the same 10-year increment so 25 so the
daughter 25 35 45 55 Etc and they're
lined up okay and then I start to
imagine when they might have kids so
there's a little this is a little bit of
guessing but I start to put you know
grandkid one grandkid 2 grandkid three
grandkid four okay and then I go to what
is the Actuarial expectation of my life
which is you know low to mid 80s and I
ask the question what would another
decade buy me and on one level it
doesn't look that interesting right it's
buying me the difference between being
83 and
93 but if that 10 years is at a
reasonable high level of function and
let's be clear it's not going to look
like it looks now but I Define what that
function is I still want to be able to
walk up a flight of stairs I still want
to be able to carry a bag of groceries I
still want to be able to lift my
suitcase
up I get I look down and I see what a
difference it is in terms of those
relationships it's a profound difference
in the decade of that person's life and
my ability to be a part of that life and
for them to be a part of my life and I
say all of that because it's the why
that matters a little bit here right
right right right well you know that
might be part of the Magic Bullet in
relationship to prevention is that
well why you should eat junk food is
obvious it's immediately gratifying and
delicious so the why is a
no-brainer it's the same with abusive
drugs like cocaine we don't have to
explain why people abuse cocaine we have
to explain why all people don't abuse it
100% of the time because it immediately
activates the systems that mediate
positive emotion so that's a
no-brainer if you look at the alcohol
cessation literature what you find is
quite a pronounced
multi-decade set of conclusions that
show that if you want to stop drinking
you need a reason you need to find
something to do that's better than
drinking and if you like alcohol
drinking is pretty good it's a highly
social activity it's not that expensive
it's available constantly um it's an
anxiolytic it it's a psychomotor
stimulant for some people it probably
increases opiate response so it's very
rewarding well the problem is is that it
you know it ruins your life over a
multi-decade period and blows your
relationships to bits but if you don't
have a vision of yourself extending
across that span of time then why the
hell should you care and it might be the
same on the exercise and nutrition front
it's like you're not going to take care
of yourself unless you know you have
something useful to do and I've been
talking to people all over the world
about taking responsibility partly
because if you take responsibility for
other people it improves your
relationships and if you have have
better relationships well you're much
more resilient and you're and you have
much more of an opportunity for positive
emotion and so if you take
responsibility you have a long-term
vision of yourself as well and so maybe
the psychologists and the medical
doctors can get together and figure out
how to Ally the work on exercise and
nutritional U improvement with
motivation and and produce prevention
strategies that people will actually
follow partly because they see a reason
in following them you need a reason to
make sacrifice you know yeah I I I think
that's the Cure I think that's the key
Point here and I think that's that's the
part that's the point I'm trying to make
with respect to emotional health which
is if you don't have this
why we're just not robots that can be
programmed to do all those other things
we have to have a reason and I think
your examples are great ones virtually
everything that is bad for your health
feels much better in the moment so to
say no to that you ha to to to offset
the hyperbolic discounting problem of
delayed gratification you must have
something that is stronger than the
immediate honic pleasure of either not
exercising eating the wrong thing
staying up too late you pick pick
whatever it
is yeah well you know when I want to
have a banana split which is reasonably
often I think yeah you know but I'm
pretty happy to have uh physiological
iCal Constitution that's a lot more like
I I a lot more like it was when I was 23
than I had when I was 50 that's pretty
good deal you know and the value in that
I suppose that marginal decade for
example the value in that palpable
enough so that I think yeah well it is a
sacrifice but it's probably worth it so
that's the question hey what's what's it
worth making a sacrifice for and it's a
question you have to answer if you're
going to put your life together and put
your health together all right everyone
watching and listening on YouTube thank
you very much for your time and
attention to the Daily wire plus people
for facilitating this conversation
that's much appreciated I'm here in
Boise Idaho today U doing this
conversation daily wire always finds me
a studio and a studio for my guests um
to the film crew here thank you very
much for flawless experience um Dr y I
was very good of you to talk to me today
I wish you the best of luck without
living the book and in your own life and
uh I would also uh encourage those who
are listening
to continue to follow our conversation
on the dailywire plus platform and we'll
talk for another half an hour on more
biographical and personal issues thanks
very much everybody thanks Dr Adia it's
good to meet you thank you so
much hello everyone I would encourage
you to continue listening to my
conversation with my guest on dailywire
plus.com